Your heart pumps blood through arteries
to deliver oxygen and nutrients
throughout your body.
The blood returns to your heart through veins
so that it can be pumped to the lungs
to pick up more oxygen.
When blood is in leg veins,
it is working against gravity
to return to the heart.
Blood pressure in veins is low,
so there are valves in the walls of the
veins to prevent the blood from flowing backward.
Leg muscles contract to squeeze the veins
and help pump your blood back to the heart.
Some people’s legs have large, ropey veins.
Called varicose veins,
they are large because
they are always expanded.
The blood in these veins is having a hard
time returning to the heart,
and pressure from above
the force of gravity
on the column of blood
forces the thin walls of the veins
to push outward, making the veins bigger.
An enlarged varicose vein
contains more blood,
and this also puts pressure on the
valves in the veins,
which can cause them to fail.
Changes during pregnancy can promote
the development of varicose veins.
The pregnancy puts more pressure
on the veins in your legs and pelvis.
To support the developing baby,
the volume of blood in your body
is increased but blood flow
from your legs to your pelvis is reduced.
Hormonal changes can also contribute
and increase the elasticity of
blood vessel walls.
When varicose veins
occur during pregnancy,
they often resolve on their own
during the months after delivery.